1. Recap of Data, Goals, and Tasks
I approached this assignment somewhat in reverse.  I knew I wanted to make use of linked charts and create something that would allow for some user activity.  As a result, I spent a good deal of time looking around Kaggle (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets) to find a dataset that might support this.  I did not find one on Kaggle, but I did find a reference the some data on US Census Bureau's web site and after exploring there found the 2020 ASPEP Datasets & Tables (https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/2020/econ/apes/annual-apes.html), which breaks down public spending across 26 categories for every state.

This was a great dataset as it would allow for some interesting "drill down" activity for the user as well as challenge me in using Altair.

The final task here, was to allow the user to get an overview of public expenditures across the United States as a whole as well being able to "drill down" into individual states and get a graphical representation of how different states allocate their budget.


2. Link to the Visualization
https://clayv.github.io/UC_Boulder_DTSA_5304_Final/FinalProject.html


3. Summary of the Key Design Elements and Justification
I chose to use a map as the primary method of interaction along with a circle mark on each state.  Circle marks were chosen along with a size of 50 after experimenting with other sizes and shapes and finding this combination worked best in the area with Connecticut, Rhode Island, and Massachusetts as those are all states with smaller areas and in close proximity to each other.

The dot colors of green and red on the map were chosen to show which states' data was "go"ing to be shown in the bar chart below (or alternatively which ones had "stop"ped being displayed). Additionally, a tooltip is used on the circle marks to show the name of the state and what that state's total expenditures for 2020 without having to click.

Once the user does click the circle mark, the chart breaking down the spending for that state is updated. I _really_ wanted and planned to use a pie chart to show how different states allocate their budget.  Unfortunately I discovered that Altair does not support pie charts, but only after spending several hours wrangling the data and getting the map just right. So I decided to switch to a horizontal bar chart because a column chart made the text labels very difficult to read.  Finally, I was never able to get tooltips to work on the column chart, so I added the state's spending figure for each category as a percentage of that state's total budget next to that category's bar.


4. Final Evaluation Approach
I was only able to get my immediate family to work with the visualization, none of whom had much interest in the data or the visualization when I asked for their help. Given this it would be difficult to describe the process as any of the four common evaluation techniques and instead I had each one use the visualization individually and told them that this showed spending in US by state and to "move the mouse around".  What I found was that the green dots did not immediately indicate to anyone that they were clickable, but as soon as a tooltip appeared they understood that spot had something special about it.  However, they still had to be told to click on them to change the bar chart below.

Once they did click on it, they all immediately noticed the high percentage of any state's budget that was spent on education.  One of them, a high school student, called into question whether or not the data was real.  "I feel like this is a lie", she said.  My wife, a teacher a private school, noticed the high percentage and said, "Well why is the education at public schools so bad?"


5. Synthesis of Findings
Overall, I thing the visualization worked well as it provided insights to each person that used it (e.g. "I would have thought community projects would have the biggest budget.").  However, the initial stumbling blocks indicated to me that although the _visuals_ worked well, the assumption is that these are static and therefore some amount of instruction is required to let people know what they can do.  Secondly, the calling into question of the veracity of the data indicated that I should have also clearly stated what the source of the data was, the US Census Bureau.

Also, it was not obvious to some that the bar chart represents the selected state's budget (or all states if none were selected).  I tried for a long time to figure out how to update the title of a visualization dynamically, but was never able to.  So in a future iteration I'd like to see if I could get the title to change to reflect what is being display (e.g. US Spending Break Down, California Spending Breakdown, etc.)

